は	wa	is	subject marker, marks the subject of a sentence			わたしは にほんごが すこししか はなせません。	Watashi wa nihongo ga sukoshi shika hanasemasen.	I can only speak a little Japanese.	
が	ga	is	subject marker, marks the subject of a sentence			わたしが にほんごを べんきょうしています。	Watashi ga nihongo o benkyō shite imasu.	I am studying Japanese.	
を	o	object marker	marks the object of a sentence			わたしは にほんごを はなせます。	Watashi wa nihongo o hanasemasu.	I can speak Japanese.	
に	ni	to/at	direction marker, marks the destination of an action			わたしは にほんに いきたいです。	Watashi wa Nihon ni ikitai desu.	I want to go to Japan.	
で	de	by/at	location marker, marks the location of an action			くるまで うちに かえります。	Kuruma de uchi ni kaerimasu.	I will go home by car.	
と	to	with	conjunction marker, marks a connection between two clauses			にほんごと えいごが はなせます。	Nihongo to Eigo ga hanasemasu.	I can speak Japanese and English.	
から	kara	from	origin marker, marks the origin of an action			にほんから きました。	Nihon kara kimashita.	I came from Japan.	
まで	made	until	endpoint marker, marks the endpoint of a range or interval			にほんごを めざして べんきょうしています。あと ５ねん がんばります。	Nihongo o mezashite benkyō shite imasu. Ato go-nen ganbarimasu.	I am studying to aim for Japanese. I will work hard for another 5 years.	
や	ya	and	conjunction marker, marks a connection between two clauses	[sound:36_ya.mp3]		私はジュースやコーヒーを飲みます。		I drink juice and coffee.	
も	mo	also	inclusive marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description			わたしも にほんごが すこししか はなせません。	Watashi mo Nihongo ga sukoshi shika hanasemasen.	I can only speak a little Japanese too.	
の	no	of	partitive marker, marks possession or association			あたしのともだちはじめです。	Atashi no tomodachi wa hajime desu.	My friend is a beginner.	
には	ni wa	in marker	marks the location of something			家には犬がいます。		There is a dog in the house.	
か	ka	or	question marker, marks a yes/no question			きょうはあめがふっていますか。	Kyou wa ame ga futte imasu ka?	Is it raining today?	
ので	node	therefore; because of that	indicates the reason or cause of something			あまり にほんごが じょうずじゃないので、がんばります。	Amari nihongo ga jouzu janai node, ganbarimasu.	"I'm working hard because I'm not good at Japanese."	
がいい	ga ii	good subject marker	shows a good choice			ここがいいです。		This is good.	
かもしれない	kamo shirenai	may, might be	shows uncertainty			彼が来るかもしれません。		He might come.	
ね	ne	question particle, seeking agreement	seeks agreement or confirmation			あのひとはやさしいね。	Ano hito wa yasashii ne.	That person is kind, right?	
といった	toitta	such as	introduces examples			果物といったものを買いました。		I bought things like fruit.	
だ	da	copula	links the subject and predicate	[sound:d11-da.mp3]		彼は先生だ。		He is a teacher.	
ば	ba	if marker	introduces a conditional clause	[sound:d16-ba.mp3]		雨が降らなければ、遠足に行きます。		"If it doesn't rain, I will go on the field trip."	
がいいとおもいます	ga ii to omoimasu	I think it is good			gives opinion	彼女がいいと思います。		"I think she's good."	
からだ	karada	body	refers to the body			からだが大切です。		Taking care of the body is important.	
です	desu	polite copula	"polite form of the copula ""da"""			これは本です。		This is a book.	
こと	koto	thing	general term for something			ことが大切です。		Things are important.	
かも	kamo	perhaps	uncertainty marker, expresses uncertainty about something			彼が来るかもしれません。		He may come.	
よ	yo	so	conclusion marker, marks the conclusion of an action			おいしいよ！	Oishii yo!	"It's delicious!"	
て	te	gerund marker	shows continuing action	[sound:19_te.mp3]		彼が勉強しています。		He is studying.	
という	to iu	so-called	introduces a label or nickname			彼女は「アリス」という名前です。		"Her name is ""Alice""."	
た	ta	past tense marker	marks past tense	[sound:16_ta.mp3]		彼女が来た。		She came.	
ように	youni	so that, in order to	in a way, so that			わたしたちは ぜんりょくで べんきょうするように がんばります。	Watashitachi wa zenryoku de benkyou suru youni ganbarimasu.	We will do our best to study as much as possible.	
な	na	interjection marker	adds emphasis or indicates emotion	[sound:21_na.mp3]		彼女は美しいな。		"She is beautiful, isn't she?"	
"とおもいます	to omoimasu	I think	gives opinion			彼女は美しいと思います。		I think she is beautiful.	
ます	masu	polite verb ending	makes a verb polite			彼は勉強します。		He studies.	
のに	noni	despite	contrast marker, marks a contrast between two clauses			あめが ふっているのに さんぽに いく。	Ame ga futteiru noni sanpo ni iku.	"Although it's raining, I'll go for a walk."	
ところ	tokoro	at this point/now	temporal marker, marks a sequence of actions or occurrences			彼女がいるところが知りたい。		I want to know where she is.	
ところが	tokoro ga	but	shows contrast						
といっても	to itte mo	even though	shows contrast						
といったら	to ittara	if you say	introduces a hypothetical scenario						
とか	toka	etcetera	used to include additional items in a list						
"といって	to itte	so-called	introduces a label or nickname						
について	nitsuite	about	concerning, regarding			この しょうゆについて しりたいことが ありますか。	Kono shouyu nitsuite shiritai koto ga arimasu ka.	Do you have any questions about this soy sauce?	
でも	demo	but, however	indicates a contrast or concession			びょうきです。でも、かいしゃにいきます。	Byouki desu. Demo, kaisha ni ikimasu.	"I'm sick, but I'm going to work."	
"とかんがえます	to kangaemasu	I think	gives opinion						
へ	e	to	direction marker, marks the destination of an action			にほんへ いきたいです。	Nihon e ikitai desu.	I want to go to Japan.	
より	yori	than	inclusion marker, marks the inclusion of one element within another			りんごより ばなながすきです。	Ringo yori banana ga suki desu.	I like bananas more than apples.	
だけ	dake	only	limit marker, marks the limit of an action			しゅくだいを いちじかん だけ して、あとはあそびます。	Shukudai wo ichijikan dake shite, ato wa asobimasu.	"I'll only do homework for one hour and then play."	
だって	datte	because	explanation marker, marks the explanation of an action or occurrence			あのひとはわたしのともだちだって。	Ano hito wa watashi no tomodachi datte.	That person is my friend, because...	
だってば	datteba	emphatic particle, assertion	adds emphasis to a statement or complaint			もうやめてくれだってば！	Mou yamete kure datteba!	I said, stop it already!	
ばかり	bakari	only; just	indicates that the action of the sentence is the only thing happening			わたしは かばんに ほんが ひとつ ばかり いれました。	Watashi wa kaban ni hon ga hitotsu bakari iremashita.	I only put one book in the bag.	
ほど	hodo	extent	indicates the extent of something			あの ねこは ひろい ほど おおきくなる。	Ano neko wa hiroi hodo ookiku naru.	That cat will grow as big as the space it has.	
など	nado	and so on/etc.	non-exhaustive listing marker, marks an incomplete list of items			いろいろな たべものが あります。すしや やきにくなど。	Iroirona tabemono ga arimasu. Sushiya yakiniku nado.	There are various foods such as sushi and grilled meat.	
ずつ	zutsu	each; at a time	indicates that something is done for each item			りんごを さんびきずつ あげました。	Ringo o sanbikizutsu agemashita.	I gave three apples each.	
"にたいして	nitaishte	regarding; towards	indicates the target of the action or state			きょうしつの せんせいに しつもんを しました。	Kyoshitsu no sensei ni shitsumon o shimashita.	I asked a question to the teacher in the classroom.	
にとって	nitotte	for; to	indicates the importance or value of something to someone			あのひとにとって かぞくが いちばん たいせつです。	Ano hito ni totte kazoku ga ichiban taisetsu desu.	Family is the most important thing for that person.	
によって	niyotte	by; due to	indicates the reason or cause of something			ひこうきは てんきによって ちがうひこうじかんが かかります。	Hikouki wa tenki ni yotte chigau hikou jikan ga kakarimasu.	The flight time varies due to weather.	
によると	niyoruto	according to	indicates the source of information			てんきよほうによると あしたは あめです。	Tenki yohou ni yoru to ashita wa ame desu.	According to the weather forecast, it will rain tomorrow.	
なら	nara	if	indicates a hypothetical condition and its result			あした あめが ふるなら、ピクニックは やめよう。	Ashita ame ga furu nara, pikunikku wa yameyou.	"If it rains tomorrow, let's cancel the picnic."	
ても	temo	even if	indicates a concession or supposition			あめが ふってても、わたしは でかけます。	Ame ga futte temo, watashi wa dekakemasu.	"Even if it's raining, I will go out."	
ては	tewa	if	indicates a conditional action			うちに かえっては れんらくを します。	Uchi ni kaette wa renraku o shimasu.	If I go home, I will contact you.	
てば	teba	if	indicates a conditional action			にほんごが わかれば、にほんに すむことが できます。	Nihongo ga wakareba, Nihon ni sumu koto ga dekimasu.	If you understand Japanese, you can live in Japan.	
として	toshite	as	indicates a standard or a role			わたしは かれの おしゅじんとして でんわに でた。	Watashi wa kare no oshujin toshite denwa ni deta.	I answered the phone as his wife.	
としても	toshitemo	even as	indicates a concession or an extreme example			こんなに しんぱいしても、ともだちに けんかされたら かなわない。	Konnani shinpai shitemo, tomodachi ni kenka sare tara kanawanai.	"Even if I worry so much, I won't be able to deal with it if I fight with my friend."	
とともに	totomoni	with	along with, together with			わたしは ともだちと とともに いきます。	Watashi wa tomodachi to totomoni ikimasu.	I go with my friend.	
にかんして	nikanshite	concerning	in relation to, with regard to			この もんだい に かんして、あなたは どう おもいますか。	Kono mondai nikanshite, anata wa dou omoimasu ka.	What do you think about this problem?	
につき	nitsuki	per	per, each, every			ひとりにつき、ふたまいのチケットをください。	Hitori nitsuki, nimai no chiketto o kudasai.	Please give me two tickets per person.	
ねば	neba	if not	unless, without			やくいかないと、おくれてしまうねばならない。	Hayaku ikanai to, okurete shimau neba naranai.	"If we don't hurry, we'll be late."	
ねん	nen	years	years			わたしは　にじゅうさんねんです。	Watashi wa nijuusan nen desu.	I am 23 years old.	
ぶり	buri	after an interval of time	after, for the first time in			あのえいがは、5ねんぶりにぞくへんがつくられました。	Ano eiga wa, go-nen buri ni tsuzuki-hen ga tsukuraremashita.	A sequel to that movie was made for the first time in five years.	
べき	beki	should, must	should, ought to			わたしたちは かんきょうを まもるべきです。	Watashitachi wa kankyou o mamoru beki desu.	We should protect the environment.	
もん	mon	reason	reason, cause			それは、てんきの わるさが もんです。	Sore wa, tenki no warusa ga mon desu.	"That's because of the bad weather."	
わけ	wake	reason	reason, explanation			それは、しごとがいそがしかったわけです。	Sore wa, shigoto ga isogashikatta wake desu.	"That's because I was busy with work."	
はも	wamo	even	emphasis marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description						
やら	yara	and so on/etc.	non-exhaustive listing marker, marks an incomplete list of items						
かな	kana	I wonder	speculation marker, expresses speculation about something						
やって	yatte	trying/doing	progressive marker, marks an ongoing action						
かしら	kashira	I wonder	speculation marker, expresses speculation about something						
ごと	goto	altogether	totality marker, marks the entirety of an action						
どころ	dokoro	let alone	emphasis marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description						
かぎり	kagiri	as far as/to the extent that	limit marker, marks the limit of an action						
なく	naku	without	negation marker, negates an action or occurrence						
なり	nari	become/changing into	change marker, marks a transition from one state to another						
ましても	mashitemo	not to mention	emphasis marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description						
ゆえ	yue	therefore	consequence marker, marks the consequence of an action						
ゆえに	yue ni	therefore	consequence marker, marks the consequence of an action						
そして	soshite	and then	temporal marker, marks a sequence of actions or occurrences						
けど	kedo	however	contrast marker, marks a contrast between two clauses						
なお	nao	besides/in addition	additive marker, adds elements to a previous statement						
かといって	ka to itte	however	contrast marker, marks a contrast between two clauses						
なか	naka	inside/among/within	location marker, marks the location of an action						
からそう	karasou	so	conclusion marker, marks the conclusion of an action						
なんて	nante	such/like/how	exclamation marker, expresses surprise or amazement						
きり	kiri	after/since	temporal marker, marks a sequence of actions or occurrences						
さえ	sae	even	emphasis marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description						
かしらの	kashirano	I wonder	speculation marker, expresses speculation about something						
それとも	soretomo	or	alternative marker, marks an alternative action or occurrence						
かた	kata	how	question marker, marks an interrogative clause						
はもちろん	wamochiron	of course	certainty marker, expresses certainty about something						
けれども	keredomo	but	contrast marker, marks a contrast between two clauses						
そういう	souiu	such/like that	demonstrative marker, marks the object of the sentence						
それぞれ	sorezore	each/respectively	distributive marker, marks the distribution of an action or occurrence						
なんか	nanka	somehow/something	non-specific marker, expresses non-specificity about something						
およそ	oyoso	about/approximately	approximation marker, expresses approximation about something						
そもそも	somosomo	in the first place	initiation marker, marks the initiation of an action or occurrence						
そうして	soushite	and so/thereupon	temporal marker, marks a sequence of actions or occurrences						
もしくは	moshikuwa	or	alternative marker, marks an alternative action or occurrence						
それに	soreni	besides/in addition	additive marker, adds elements to a previous statement						
はず	hazu	should/ought to	expectation marker, expresses expectations about something						
とも	tomo	also	inclusive marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description						
までも	mademo	even	emphasis marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description						
しかも	shikamo	moreover	additive marker, adds elements to a previous statement						
こそ	koso	indeed	emphasis marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description						
かならず	kanarazu	without fail/certainly	certainty marker, expresses certainty about something						
もしかすると	moshikasuruto	perhaps/maybe	uncertainty marker, expresses uncertainty about something						
そうしたら	soushitara	if so	condition marker, marks the condition on which an action or occurrence depends						
なに	nani	what	question marker, marks an interrogative clause						
かつ	katsu	and	conjunction marker, marks a connection between two clauses						
かね	kane	it seems	speculation marker, expresses speculation about something						
それなら	sore nara	if that is the case	condition marker, marks the condition on which an action or occurrence depends						
しかた	shikata	how/in what way	question marker, marks an interrogative clause						
どうも	doumo	somehow/in some way	non-specific marker, expresses non-specificity about something						
どうして	doushite	why	question marker, marks an interrogative clause						
そうか	souka	I see	realization marker, expresses realization about something						
どうしよう	doushiyou	how/in what way	question marker, marks an interrogative clause						
なおかつ	naokatsu	besides/moreover	additive marker, adds elements to a previous statement						
おそらく	osoraku	probably	speculation marker, expresses speculation about something						
なるべく	narubeku	as much as possible	limit marker, marks the limit of an action						
なんとか	nantoka	somehow/in some way	non-specific marker, expresses non-specificity about something						
どうせ	douse	anyway/in any case	conclusion marker, marks the conclusion of an action						
なんなら	nannara	if it comes to that/even if	condition marker, marks the condition on which an action or occurrence depends						
なんてこと	nante koto	such a thing	exclamation marker, expresses surprise or amazement						
もっとも	mottomo	most/of all	emphasis marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description						
なんど	nando	how many times	question marker, marks an interrogative clause						
どのくらい	dono kurai	to what extent	question marker, marks an interrogative clause						
おなじ	onaji	same/equal	equivalence marker, expresses equivalence between two elements						
どころか	dokoroka	let alone	emphasis marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description						
どうでも	doudemo	anything, whatever							
なんぞ	nanzo	what?	question marker, marks an interrogative clause						
どうにも	dounimo	anyway/in any case	conclusion marker, marks the conclusion of an action						
どうぞ	douzo	please	request marker, marks a request or command						
おおまか	oomaka	roughly/approximately	approximation marker, expresses approximation about something						
どうやら	douyara	it seems	speculation marker, expresses speculation about something						
なにより	naniyori	above all	emphasis marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description						
どうみても	doumite mo	no matter how you look at it	emphasis marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description						
そうしないと	soushinaito	unless/otherwise	condition marker, marks the condition on which an action or occurrence depends						
どうせなら	dousenara	if it comes to that/even if	condition marker, marks the condition on which an action or occurrence depends						
なんとなく	nantonaku								
どうにか	dounika								
どうでもいい	doudemo ii	"it doesn't matter/I don't care"	indifference marker, expresses indifference about something						
なんとなえ	nantonae	how/in what way	question marker, marks an interrogative clause						
どのよう	dono you	how/in what way	question marker, marks an interrogative clause						
なんとも	nantomo	"I don't know"	uncertainty marker, expresses uncertainty about something						
なんにも	nannimo	nothing	negation marker, negates an action or occurrence						
および	oyobi	and/as well as	conjunction marker, marks a connection between two clauses						
なによりも	naniyorimo	above all	emphasis marker, emphasizes the inclusion of a group or element in a description						
に対して	nitaishte	regarding; towards	indicates the target of the action or state			きょうしつの せんせいに しつもんを しました。	Kyoshitsu no sensei ni shitsumon o shimashita.	I asked a question to the teacher in the classroom.	
に関して	nikanshite	concerning	in relation to, with regard to			この もんだい に かんして、あなたは どう おもいますか。	Kono mondai nikanshite, anata wa dou omoimasu ka.	What do you think about this problem?	